Diabetic retinopathy (DR), the most common microvascular complication of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus and is a leading cause of blindness in all working-age groups. By looking for microaneurysms, hemorrhages, hard exudates, cotton wool spots or soft exudates, macular edema, and vessel changes in fundus imaging we can detect diabetic retinopathy. All current treatment for it has limitations; thus, emphasising the importance of early detection and treatment to avoid dire complications. An APTOS 2019 Diabetic Retinopathy dataset from Kaggle was used containing a set of 3657 RGB retina images taken using fundus photography under a variety of imaging conditions labelled on a severity scale of 0 to 4, corresponding to “No DR”, “Mild”, “Moderate”, “Severe”, “Proliferate DR” respectively. Firstly, we have normalised and resized the dataset images to 224x224. Then, we have built multiple pre-trained CNN models of epoch 30 to reach reliable results with our highest accuracy using transformers being Test accuracy 81.58% and F1-score 80.89% with TinyViT. Next, a pipeline was created for retrieving bounding boxes and heatmaps on our diabetic retinopathy images through the use of only classification-based diabetic retinopathy image feature extractors. Our project offers novelty by using transformers to decrease the computational load through parallelization compared to previous works of its kind. Finally, this is how our project provides an accurate Diabetic retinopathy Multiclass Image classification system capable of handling the severity of our issue.
